now the US and UK have carried out new
joint strikes on houthi Targets in Yemen
including on the capital sonar the
Pentagon says they hit eight locations
an underground storage site as well as
locations associated with the group's
missile and air surveillance
capabilities it's the second time the
two allies have coordinated to attack
houthi Targets in Yemen the houthis had
previously vowed to continue their
attacks on shipping in the Red Sea
British foreign minister David Cameron
gave a statement on what prompted this
latest round of air strikes have a
listen since we last took action um 10
days ago there have been over 12 attacks
on shipping by the houthis in the Red
Sea these attacks are illegal they
unacceptable and what we've done again
is send the clearest possible message
that we will continue to degrade their
ability to carry out these taxs are
sending the clearest possible message
that we back our words and our warning
with action and I'm pleased to welcome
Sarah bazu bandi from the Giga Institute
of Middle East studies in Hamburg
welcome considering that we've seen uh
these past strikes and they don't seem
to have deterred the houthis do you
think that these most recent strikes by
the US and the UK can make a difference
in deterring the
houthis um thank you for having me good
morning um unfortunately no the short
answer is no um because when looking at
the houthis and their actions in that
region one needs to really reflect on
the ideological framework that they are
working within and their political
project the ideological framework is
that they are exactly like every other
islamist radicalized movement that we've
seen in that part of the world and
globally in fact um they are after
establishment of a worldwide Islamic
caliphate with its capital being based
in Jerusalem so they have multiple goals
to um achieve um um most importantly is
to destroy the state of Israel and um
they believe that the path to achieve
that ultimate holy goal is a longlasting
war and they are prepared and they have
shown that resilience and uh
preparedness before that they are not
going to um step down from their
Ambitions their political project is
also to establish a zi Shia
ideologically um structured uh political
establishment like they had for hundreds
hundreds of years north of Yemen until
1960s when eventually they were
dismantled so
this temporarily um might contain the
attacks but in the long run we're
dealing with a very dangerous ideology
and um it's it's very hard to contain it
and we should say that Iran also plays
an important geopolitical role here what
kind of reaction do you think that we
might see from tan is a widening of the
conflict in its interest at the
moment uh yes Iran has been investing uh
for a very long time in houthis and
trying to align um them and their
Ambitions with its own strategic
Ambitions and with its own in fact
ideological Ambitions because let's not
forget that one of the reason that
brought these two uh together is um
their their ideology and their World
Vision and the way that they perceive
the changes in the global framework need
to be done in order to have a um
ultimate utopian uh global system that
they have in mind um Iran is an
important supporter for for uh houthis
um there have been various pieces of
evidence leaked evidence that indicates
that um Islamic Republic um
revolutionary guards have been training
um the houi forces they have they have
bases to support and to consult with the
houi forces inside Yemen they have been
delivering arms and ammunitions to them
uh so Iran is not going to also back up
uh back down from its support for for
the houis in fact this conflict is a
god-given gift to the Iranian regime
because um there is a lot of problems at
home there is a lot of pressure
specifically domestically economically
socially Iran is going through a very
dangerous pension and banking
crisis both systems are on the verge of
collapse and bankruptcy um and Co
maintaining the public uh sentiment in
this estate of anxiety whether Iran is
going to enter into a war whether or not
what's going to happen it's it's a very
good way for the regime to to control
the society as well yeah those domestic
considerations of course very important
too Sarah thank you and please stay with
us I want to turn our Focus uh a little
more to Iran's role in the conflict as
we know following hamas's October 7th
terrorist attacks and Israel's
subsequent invasion of Gaza violence has
spread throughout the region from
Israel's border with Lebanon to Iraq uh
Syria and the Red Sea Iran really has
been at the center of it and we know tan
has been using its network of proxies to
chip away at Israel and its main Ally
the United States let's see if we can
take a closer
look Israeli troops on the advance
footage from Israel's military shows its
forces fighting in the Gaza Strip Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has
repeatedly framed this as a struggle
between Israel and Iran which backs
Hamas Israel has long been locked in a
shadow war with Tran conducting covert
strikes and targeted killings it was
believed to have been behind this strike
in Damascus at the weekend but Netanyahu
says his country is now in direct
conflict with
Iran who says we're not attacking
Iran we are attacking it Iran is the
head of the octopus and you can see its
tentacles all
around Iran backs a network of militant
groups throughout the Middle East among
their goals to undermine Israel and
drive out American influence these
proxies have become more active
following the October 7th Terror
attacks in Lebanon Tran supports and
arms Hezbollah seen by some countries as
a terrorist organization its Fighters
fire Rockets into Israel on an almost
daily basis Israel is returning fire
these images released by the Israeli
Army but while the situation here at the
border is tense so far each side has
been careful to avoid an
escalation Iran also arms the huis an
armed group in Yemen Civil War which has
seized control of large parts of the
country including the capital SAR now
the hoies are attacking commercial ships
in the Red Sea they released this video
showing them bard boing and seizing a
cargo vessel they say they are acting in
solidarity with the
Palestinians Yemen is Bravely standing
against Israel thank God for your
beautiful efforts Brave Mighty and proud
Yemen is defending the oppressed and
strong Palestinian
people the United States and others have
sent warships to the region and launch
strikes on Hoy
targets another front is in Iraq and
Syria where Iran appear is to be
encouraging its militias to attack US
military bases Washington has responded
with its own
strikes Israel's president is calling
for a global response to these
challenges there is an Empire of evil
emanating from tan they have proxies all
over the region quietly lurking to
undermine any peace process and any
stability of the world and that is
exactly what we are seeing and they have
to be faith by a very strong
Coalition for the moment Gaza is the
most active front in Israel's cold war
with
Iran but Tan's proxies are becoming more
heavily involved each strike and Counter
Strike could bring the sides closer to
open
conflict so we have Sarah bazuband from
the Giga Institute of Middle East
studies uh still with us and we just
heard in that report there a little bit
of context about Iran's proxies about
this so-called axis of resistance and uh
Sarah I'd like to get your view I mean
when we're looking at groups like Hamas
and Hezbollah how much is Iran really
calling the shots
here um Iran tends to detach itself and
this if you look at the speeches of by
the Supreme Leader by other senior um
officials inside Iran they praise their
actions but they don't they don't really
take responsibility they don't share
responsibility but in fact we know that
for decades these groups have been
supported by Iran in 2018 the US
Treasury and is did a calculation and
estimate of how much Iran is uh
injecting investing financially in only
one group Hezbollah um nearly $1 billion
dollar in that one single year was
invested by Iran in hisbah paid by Iran
directly to hisbah in forms so you
cannot have a a group that you support
and invest this amount of money in them
without having the right to demand or to
influence their decision so that is my
personal opinion there is a degree of
influence there is a degree of
manipulation and control by Iran in
exchange of f to the very least in
exchange of financial incentives um and
yes of course it's very hard to to
exactly measure how how much the extent
of this influence is but there is
undoubtedly a very strong influence by
Iran over these groups and we spoke a
little bit earlier about the domestic
situation inside Iran I'm wondering if
you could tell us a little bit more
about how what's going on there is
affecting Iran's uh foreign policy and
if there's any chance that uh frictions
within Iran itself could ultimately lead
to a world in which we see um teron
seeking to to normalize relations with
Israel in the way that we have seen many
Muslim majority countries seek to
do um unfortunately to go to your qu
last question about normalization I
don't have really hope in the current uh
political Elite inside Iran to have any
desire for normalization that is against
their DNA this is not um this has
doesn't have any space in their
political imagination in their
geostrategic imaginations in their
aspirations they see themselves more in
line with countries like China and
Russia and their New World Views and
their uh New World Order narrative in
which the US power is undermined um
multiple other strong powers are rising
and that new world order creates the
space for Middle powers like Iran to
jump into a set power to establish
themselves and project themselves as a
more powerful player at the global level
so this is very much what the current uh
political Elite inside Iran really
desire to Aspire to um the situation
inside Iran for the people is extremely
dire the inflation is crushing as I
mentioned earlier the Pension funds
crisis the banking crisis Iran has 17
Pension funds according to the
government's reports nearly um 90% of
these funds are are bankrupt so they are
only paying their pensioners with the
cash injections from the government
budget so for how long the government
can last this really nobody knows but it
the fact is that with the current
economic situation they're alienating
the people they're alienating various
interest groups within the elite and the
current Elite has no desire to um align
itself with with normalizing with the
vest unfortunately well Sarah thank you
so much for sharing your insights with
us that is Sarah bazu bandi from the
Giga Institute of Middle East studies
appreciate your time
thanks gido Steinberg is a Middle East
expert at the German Institute for
international and security Affairs here
in Berlin he joins us now good to see
you gido uh what do you think is behind
this growing involvement of Iran's
proxies I mean is this only about the
war in
Gaza no it's uh more about Iran itself U
Iran's aim is is uh is to gain heany in
the region and there are two main
obstacles in its way one is Israel uh
small country but a nuclear power and
secondly it's the United States and its
military presence and therefore it uses
the
opportunity uh to show that it can hit
Israeli and American targets all all
over the area in Iraq in Syria in South
from South Lebanon in Gaza uh and in
Yemen but it wants it does not want a
full-blown conflict right now uh I
believe because it thinks it might be
too weak at the moment okay so obviously
trying to strike the balance do you
think the Islamic Republic will take
further action then and if yes what
might that look
like well the Islamic Republic already
does take further action and there is
always um the the danger of escalation
for the time being it mainly relies on
the strikes by its proxies hisbah in
Lebanon the houis in Yemen Shia militias
in in Iraq and Syria uh but I believe
that it already plans attacks on Israeli
and possibly Jewish targets abroad
simply because the leadership of the
Islamic Republic is under pressure by
its own
hardliners um to react on what has
happened in recent weeks and months
especially the direct attacks by Israel
on its Personnel leading Personnel of
the uh revolutionary guards in Syria
okay so the benefit then for Iran if
this conflict spreads out further or
even if there is an allout War across
the Middle East what is that benefit
exactly well Iran for the time being
does not want this major
conflict it simply wants to show the
Israelis the sis and the Americans that
it is able to hit targets all over the
the Middle East whenever it wants that
it is a major power in the region it
does not want a major escalation simply
because its own weak weaknesses in the
country we have seen that in early
January the major terrorist attack in
kman on the fourth of
that month it mainly fears a Revival of
the protest movement in the country not
so much the women in tan but the
protests in the uh in the Border areas
in Kurdistan in beluchistan and in husan
where big minorities live and that is
part of the reason why the Islamic
Republic does not want a major
escalation right now okay and just
clarify clarify for us again how has
Iran's Regional policy shifted since the
start of the war in
Gaza well it has shifted in so far as it
has mobilized uh virtually all of its
proxies all of its proxies I would say
in in in the whole region it has not
shifted in so far as from the beginning
Iran did not want a major conf
confrontation but it has it has ordered
its proxies to step up attacks that was
first hisbah in Lebanon which attacked
Israel early on in the war from uh from
from Southern Lebanon um it has ordered
more than 100 attacks by Shia militias
um on American Targets in Iraq and Syria
and most recently um it has well it has
ordered the houthis uh to attack um um
to attack maritim traffic in in the Red
Sea it's a dangerous policy but it's not
a policy designed uh to lead a major war
against the United States the leadership
in tan is well aware that uh that it
could lose uh such a kind of war and it
could lose its power in the country it
is mainly motivated by its desire to
stay in power in tan G Steinberg Middle
East expert from the German Institute
for international and security Affairs
gido thanks so much for your
insights and for more on this we can
cross straight to our correspondent in
London Berget Mass uh Berget what else
uh do we know about these most most
recent attacks by the US and the
UK we have a pentagon statement and that
says that eight Targets in Yemen were
hit with what they call precis Precision
strikes um they also say that it's aimed
at underground storage and at missile
and surveillance
capabilities now when it comes to the
justification for these strikes you've
already heard the UK foreign secretary
David Cameron he further flashed out in
a statement that he does not believe the
houthi narrative that this is all in
retaliation to the war in Gaza and he
bemon that hthi um had have
indiscriminately targeted shipping so
the narrative overall from the US and
the UK and the general Coalition that
are um Behind These strikes is this is
to protect international shipping to
protect um the Red Sea that's so vital
for global trade this is the second time
that the US and UK have conducted these
coordinated military strikes against the
houthis is there support for these
attacks generally in the
UK it's it's interesting a recent poll
did show that there was overall support
by the British public and also there is
generally cross-party support um when it
comes to to the the conflict in the
Middle East and also um about these
these attacks there is a little bit of
dis quiet that the opposition leader
wasn't briefed before these strikes but
generally there is cross- Party Support
that doesn't mean that there aren't also
critical voices on the left of the labor
party mainly but also
by some experts in the reg region so
they say that overall there should be a
strategy of
deescalation um as one researcher put it
with a with a ceasefire in Gaza at the
heart of this deescalation strategy and
I would say that the overall support for
the strikes um by the British public
doesn't mean that there isn't also an
anxiety uh about the the conflict in the
Middle East of course but also about
these strikes so there is of course the
risk of of that this this could um
generally escalate the conflict and this
is something that I think the British
people are aware of bur thanks so much
for bringing us up to date that's DW's
burget mass in
London